---
title: Into the compost!
---

# Into the compost!

Let's get down and dirty with decomposition. The choice of word might seem weird; not to mention usually the term _decompose_ is something we associate to a biological process, like a compost. But the meaning is still the same—the act of _decomposing something_—means to take something apart and resulting in a set of smaller things. The Wikipedia article on _decomposition_ says the following:

> Decomposition is the process by which organic substances are broken down into simpler organic matter.

This is on the page concerning [the biological process of decomposition](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decomposition). The definition related to computer sciences says the following:

> Decomposition in computer science, also known as factoring, is breaking a complex problem or system into parts that are easier to conceive, understand, program, and maintain.

So when we're calling `uncons` on an array containing `x`, we're essentially decomposing the list, `xs`, into smaller parts that constitute to the _head_ and _tail_ of `xs`, respectively.

But how is this related to JavaScript and the Handyman at all?

## Destructuring without a wrecking ball

As of what's known as "ECMAScript 6" or "ECMAScript 2015", we can destructure things like lists in JavaScript. You're most likely familiar with this:

```js
const xs = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];

const x = xs[0];
const y = xs[1];
const z = xs[2];
```

That's annoying, right? Destructuring allows us to be more concise about it:

```js
const xs = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
const [x, y, z] = xs;
```

The two blocks of code above are identical, but you can see which is easier to read. But we can take this one step further; you want the first two elements of the list and the rest of the list in their own variables. Enter JavaScript's _spread syntax_

## Something to put on your bread

Like its name says, the spread syntax allows us to spread things like arrays even more than just single elements. Consider the list `xs` from above, if we take it apart into the two first elements and the rest that we don't explicitly take:

```js
const [x, y, ...rest] = xs;
```

The spread syntax above reads like a piece of beautiful poetry; first two elements are `x` and `y`, and the rest of `xs` will be a list called `rest`. It works the other way, too:

```js
const [...rest, x, y] = xs;
```

Oh wait, no it doesn't. What this gives us is just an error: `SyntaxError: Rest element must be last element`. We can only destructure the _literal rest_ of the list. If we want to skip elements so that we get the first and third element from `xs`, we can do the following.

```js
const [x, , y] = xs;
```

So keep in mind, _spread syntax_ can only be used for the ending of a list _if you are destructuring_—or _decomposing_—a list.

The second thing spread syntax enables us to do is create copies of lists. Consider `xs` above again being the numbers `1..5`, but we'd like to add `6` and `7` to the end of the list.

```js
const ys = [...xs, 6, 7];
```

Here, `...xs` means that it will spread out every element of `xs` as if they were there in the first place. The code above is essentially equal to the following.

```js
const ys = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7];
```

or

```js
const ys = [xs[0], xs[1], xs[2], xs[3], xs[4], 6, 7];
```

```js
const xs = [1, 2, 3];
const ys = [...xs, 4, 5, 6];
```

- [ ] list access: taking a little bit from lists
  - [ ]introduce why these are first
  - [ ] introduce destructuring for lists
  - [ ] _excercise:_ reimplement the previous four operations with only destructuring
  - [ ] compare solutions from first and second
- list manipulation
  - _excercise:_ `map` - and the magic of mapping from A to B
    - introduce `map` basics
    - why the term "map"
    - advantages of map
    - implement `map` with `Array.prototype.map`
      - why are we just wrapping the native `map` into own
      - argument order
    - implement `map` without `Array.prototype.map`

  - _excercise:_ `reduce` - the alpha and the omega
    - implement reduce with `Array.prototype.reduce`
      - every other list operation is essentially `reduce`
    - implement your own reduce without native `reduce`
  - _excercise:_ `filter`
  - _bonus excercise:_ reduce it even further
    - implement the previous list operations you made, but this time only with `reduce`
