---
title: Creating a project
tags: getting started, git, package.json
---

# Creating a project

First off, create a new Node project and a repository for it. A Github repo isn't required, as it can entirely be worked on locally, however it's a good idea to store your code outside of your computer as well, in case something wonky happens.

For the purposes of this book, I'll call the project `handyman`. You're free to pick any name you like to it (can be anything that you like, library names don't have set rules to what is good and what is bad), but any time "handyman" is mentioned, it will refer to this project by default.

Create this folder whereever you like, it's worth having a single directory, in which you then have all your projects in their own directories. Personally, all my projects are in a directory called "Projects" in the home directory.

## The anatomy of a project

What's a project—or module—in the first place? With Node.js this is any directory that contains a `package.json` file. This file describes—or ideally, should describe—everything that a project needs to have to be able to run. The directory that contains the `package.json` file is the project root.

The following is a set of best practices that I've set into throughout the years, but these are just that—best practices or conventions that a lot of people have adopted. These are by no means rules or requirements, but they help with keeping your project organised.

 * `src/` — the directory where your application/library code should exist
   * Some people use `lib/` instead of `src/` for their code if the project is a library
 * `test/` — the directory where your application's/library's test-related stuff should exist
   * Another existing convention is to not have a separate `test/` directory, but to keep tests in the same directory as the code being tested

### What's the difference

You may notice that a lot of the times the words _project_, _module_ and _library_ are used interchangeably, and for the most part they are the same thing. The difference in meaning, however is:

 * a _project_ is the entire thing, source code, tests, the works
 * a _module_ is either a single file that's being imported, or a _module_ or _library_ that you've installed through `yarn add`/`npm install`
 * a _library_ is a project, but is meant to be used by other projects and as such, is not a self-contained application

### Initializing a new project

If you haven't created a directory for your project, do so now. From the command-line, go to that directory and run `yarn init -y`.

The command `yarn init` creates a simple `package.json` file with some default information in the directory it's run in. Adding the `-y` flag to the command means that it should just use the default settings.

### Creating a git repository

The next step is to make the project root a Git repository. To do this, run `git init` in the project root.

Create the file `.gitignore` in your project root as well, and add `node_modules/` into it. We don't want to check in any modules installed through `yarn` or `npm` to the repository.

> protip: a quick way to create a basic `.gitignore` is to run the following
> ```sh
> echo "node_modules/" > .gitignore
> ```

Add all files to Git and make your first commit.

```sh
git add .
git commit -m "Initial commit!"
```

You should now have a base project to start working on.
