---
title: Bundling your module
tags: webpack, bundling, compilation
---

# Bundling your module

Because we want to be able to use modules in code that will be used in environments not supporting them, we'll have to add an intermediate step to transform our code into a format that the browser can use, through something called bundling.

Simply put, bundling is taking your code, resolving all imports found in your code and in its imported modules and merging all of this code into a single file. In reality, things are a little bit more complicated than this. The [page describing the concepts of the process involved](https://webpack.js.org/concepts/) is worth looking into at some point.

## Not for bundling alone

Even though it's called bundling here, bundling itself is only a part of the entire process. Webpack features a number of concepts and methods that can be applied to certain parts of this process to perform tasks like code transformation, CSS extraction, cleaning up the code and splitting up the code bundle into smaller chunks to name a few.

Taking a look at the [list of plugins](https://webpack.js.org/plugins/) and [list of loaders](https://webpack.js.org/loaders/) might give you an idea of the scope of the things you can do with your code.

## Bundle, go!

There are a number of bundlers that are used in JavaScript projects, where all of them allow a lot of customization to the process through the use of plugins.

{% detail summary="List of popular bundlers" %}

- grunt
- gulp
- rollup
- webpack
- fusebox

{% enddetail %}

For this project, we will be using Webpack, as its used in a lot of other projects. If you have heard rumours about Webpack and its configuration hell that it can result in and you haven't looked into it lately, chances are a lot of those issues have been resolved.

Start by installing `webpack` and its command-line utility `webpack-cli`:

```sh
yarn add webpack webpack-cli --dev
```

> Remember to include the `--dev` flag when installing Webpack. Installing a module with the `--dev` flag will add the module as a development dependency in your `package.json`. Development dependencies should contain only modules and libraries that are used when developing the project—like unit testing libraries, bundlers—libraries that you don't want to include in your release.

To be able to use `webpack`, perform the following change to your `package.json` file:

```diff
  {
    "name": "handyman-work",
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "main": "index.js",
    "author": "Stefan Rimaila <stefan@rimaila.fi>",
    "license": "MIT",
+   "scripts": {
+     "start": "webpack"
+   },
    "devDependencies": {
      "webpack": "^4.16.5",
      "webpack-cli": "^3.1.0"
    }
  }
```

You have now set up bundling for your code. By default, running `webpack` will use the file `src/index.js` as its entry point and `dist/main.js` for the resulting bundle.

  - entry point = ?
  - output = ?

We'll look into the bundling step in some more detail later on, but for now, take it to a test run.

## Test drive

To run commands specified in `package.json`, the only thing you need to do is:

```sh
yarn run start
```

Where `start` is the name of the script to be run.

> Both `yarn` and `npm` come with shorthands for a set of commonly used scripts. `start`, `install` and `publish` to name a few allow you to omit the `run` command and simply run `yarn start`.

Running `yarn start` should yield output which should look similar to the output below. Don't mind any possible warnings at this point.

```
yarn run v1.9.2
$ webpack src/index.js
Hash: 116e26ab2942443dcf10
Version: webpack 4.16.5
Time: 189ms
Built at: 15/08/2018 14:47:21
  Asset    Size  Chunks             Chunk Names
main.js  13 KiB       0  [emitted]  main
Entrypoint main = main.js
[1] ./src/index.js 45 bytes {0} [built]
[3] (webpack)/buildin/module.js 497 bytes {0} [built]
[4] (webpack)/buildin/global.js 489 bytes {0} [built]
    + 6 hidden modules

WARNING in configuration
The 'mode' option has not been set, webpack will fallback to 'production' for this value. Set 'mode' option to 'development' or 'production' to enable defaults for each environment.
You can also set it to 'none' to disable any default behavior. Learn more: https://webpack.js.org/concepts/mode/
✨  Done in 1.67s.
```

If the process ran without error—ignore any possible warnings for now—you should now have a `dist/main.js` file that will be the newly created bundle. Congratulations! 🍭

## Test drive, part 2

Test your newly created bundle, but instead of running `node src/index.js`, run `node dist/main.js` — and lo and behold, it works!

```
{ url:
  { parse: [Function: b],
    resolve: [Function],
    resolveObject: [Function],
    format: [Function],
    Url: [Function: s] } }
```

Take a look into the newly built bundle. Don't get scared if it looks garbled; this is what the warning Webpack gave you relates to. Since `webpack` was run without the `mode` option, it defaults to creating a production-ready bundle; this means that the code will have a number of additional optimization steps performed to it, of which the most visible part is that the resulting source code has been minified. Let's fix this first.

Make the following change to your `package.json`:

```diff
  {
    "name": "handyman-work",
    "version": "1.0.0",
    "main": "index.js",
    "author": "Stefan Rimaila <stefan@rimaila.fi>",
    "license": "MIT",
    "scripts": {
-     "start": "webpack"
+     "start": "webpack --mode development"
    },
    "devDependencies": {
      "webpack": "^4.16.5",
      "webpack-cli": "^3.1.0"
    }
  }
```

Now run `yarn start` again, and you will notice the warning has disappeared. Open the resulting bundle file again in your editor, and you will see a big difference.

But there's a lot of... _stuff_. A ton of it in fact. It seems like the code you wrote is just a small fraction of the resulting bundle, which for the moment being is entirely accurate. The rest of the code the bundle includes is Webpack's own internal logic that's required for your code to work, which takes care of doing the "importing" and ensuring that code is evaluated in the correct order for it to work. In most cases, every bundle you create will contain a copy of that code.

Just in case, verify that the new bundle still work by running `node dist/main.js` again.

## Finishing up

Now you have a working pipeline for bundling your code so that it works like it should. What seems like it was a lot of work to get anything running without errors, will for the most part fade into the background from now on, only requiring you to make minor changes or adding extra options for the bundling process.

In the next section, we will look into creating a bundling configuration and use that instead of specifying all the bundling options in the `package.json` script.

But before you move on, though, be sure to commit your changes!

```sh
git add .
git commit -m "Add code compiling"
```

```
[master 94683a6] Add code compiling
  4 files changed, 2728 insertions(+), 1 deletion(-)
  create mode 100644 dist/main.js
  create mode 100644 src/index.js
  create mode 100644 yarn.lock
```
