---
title: What is a tool belt and why should I make one?
wip: true
---

You don't have to create your own hammer to be able to build a house. Software development, however is a different beast altogether. Different, because you can make tools of equal if not even higher quality than the ones you already use. And if you're curious, you're encouraged to study the tools you already use and understand how they work under the hood and develop your own skills further by reading code that is not your own.

A _utility library_ (also known as _toolchain_, _tool belt_, _utility belt_) is a good way to not only get familiar with creating small, reusable functions, also provides a good way to get experience with writing documentation, ensuring consistent coding style, unit testing, test coverage, creating your own library to release on the NPM registry, as well as setting up an automated pipeline to ensure you the library you're using will work in a (somewhat) predictable manner.

Not all of these steps are mandatory, but let's consider if you do everything in this book, you will learn:

- know how to easily set up a new project
- enable code bundling and compilation
- write clear, concise and useful functions
- add documentation to your functions to generate documentation
- add tests and get code coverage reports
- how to combine everything into a reusable library
- the anatomy of an NPM module allowing you to understand existing modules you install better
- publish the library to the NPM registry
- set up an automated process to build and verify your code works
- set up code analysis tools to flag potential code problems

Like I mentioned, _you do not have to do all of these steps_, but if the theme of a chapter is not clear to you or you don't know how it works, I _strongly_ recommend you to go through that chapter. You may feel when reading through this book like there is a lot of things that are unrelated to coding itself and to this I would say it's both true and false.

Writing the code itself might not be as big a part of a project when considering everything else involved in it—which is the reason why I'm writing this book. While the different steps required to get started, to testing, to publishing a library itself are fairly simple, the process involves a lot of unknowns—or things that you might not even know that are required—which can be very frustrating.

The bottomline is, that what I hope to be able to teach you through this book, is how programming itself sits into the timeline of an entire project, how you can perform quality assurance, have guarantees on what you are doing actually works, and a number of things that isn't very self-evident if you are not familiar with it.

{% detail summary="Deliberation: if you're hoping to or just starting out as a developer" %}

  - _deliberate on the number of steps described above and why they are useful_
  - _for persons not yet familiar with the entire production pipeline, hoing to start a career or just fresh into a career in programming_

{% enddetail %}
